---
layout: post
title: "About 40 hours"
date: '2024-12-06T19:02:11Z'
hidden: true
# shared:
#   Bluesky: https://bsky.app/profile/jonhoo.bsky.social/post/3kzjpuj4tfn2f
#   Mastodon: https://fosstodon.org/@jonhoo/112949562704492004
#   Twitter/X: https://x.com/jonhoo/status/1823006316815638911
#   LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/posts/jonhoo_writing-about-people-to-people-activity-7228772004160536576-JjI3
---

I often hear, especially from folks working at younger companies and the
tech giants, that the 40 hour workweek is a lie. That "the company"
secretly (or not so secretly) always wants you to work done more hours
and doesn't care if people are unhappy or burn out. That "they" will
keep piling on work with no regard for mental or physical well-being.
And while that is certainly true in some places, I think it is the
exception, not the norm. More often than not, I think reality is far
more nuanced.

Unfortunately, companies tend to fail to correct this impression
whenever they are asked about work/life balance, burnout, or workload
management. An all too common response is "we believe work/life balance
is something the company cannot dictate - it is a personal choice". With
a prior of "the company doesn't care", this comes across as (slightly
condescending) weasel-words that dodge the question.

The reality is that "what's the right number of hours to work in a week"
is not an easy question to answer. The answer varies not just from
person to person, but from week to week. And I think ignoring the
nuances does a disservice both to employees _and_ to their employers
when it comes to finding the cultural norms and organizational policies
needed to strike a sustainable balance.

# Area under the curve

So, let's explore some of that nuance. To do so, let's start with a
chart: incremental progress made per unit time, where "progress" is an
abstract value to measure the degree to which that time was spent
furthering something that's valuable to the company either directly
(actual work done) or indirectly (hiring, skill development, people
managing, etc.). Let's plot this over four weeks, each with five working
days, each with eight hours:

```
+---_  +---_  +---_  +--__  ,__  
|    | |    | |    | |    | |  `-.
|    | |    | |    | |    | |    |
```

I've included what I think are some common patterns here. By the end of
the day, most people are less productive. By the end of Thursday, we
feel our energy levels and productivity drop. By Friday morning,
our productivity is diminished from the get-go, and drops severely as
the day progresses.

It's worth highlighting that the Y-axis here is _actual_ progress made
towards impactful outcomes. If you're tired or distracted, you may spend
the same number of hours ostensibly working, but you'll make more
mistakes and take longer to arrive at solutions, and thus have a lower
overall progress per unit time.

What employers care about is the area under this curve. That is, the
sum-total progress made in a given time interval. Anecdotally, I also
think the area under this curve correlates with our own happiness -- 
at least I know that I enjoy the feeling of getting things done that
mattered,

Armed with this visualization, let's look at what some common scenarios:

## Longer days

```
+---_   +---_   --,     -,      ,    
|    `| |    `| |  ``-. | ``-.  |``-.  
|     | |     | |     | |     ` |    `-
```

The exact shape of this curve will differ from person to person. For
some, an extra hour or two at work is no big deal and doing this
would _just_ increase their overall output. While for others their
ability to concentrate, be creative, and pay attention to detail drops
precipitously as the day stretches longer. Also, with longer days, you
have less time to fully recover by the next day, so the detrimental
effect cascades.

So, as an employer, would you prefer this curve to the one above? The
area under the curve is somewhat greater, but not by a huge margin.
You're also likely paying a cost in attrition due to unhappiness. That
cost in terms of hiring + retraining isn't captured here, but is
substantial. Furthermore, work at the lower ends of the Y-axis here is
more likely to have mistakes that must be corrected later, further
adding to the cost.

## Longer workweeks

```
+---_  +---_  +---_  +--__  ,__    ,_     
|    | |    | |    | |    | |  `-. | `-. 
|    | |    | |    | |    | |    | |    `
```
```
+--__  +--__  ,__    ,__    ,_     -,     
|    | |    | |  `-. |  `-. | `-.  | ``-. 
|    | |    | |    | |    | |    ` |     `
```
```
,__    ,__    ,_     -,      ,       ,    
|  `-. |  `-. | `-.  | ``-.  |``-.   |``-.  
|    | |    | |    ` |     ` |    `- |    `-
```

At first, working more days seems attractive. Sure, the 6th day isn't
_super_ productive, but it still adds a lot of area! Once viewed over
time though, the detrimental effect becomes clearer -- seen across a
month, the area you added in the first few weeks is quickly eaten up by
the losses in later weeks.

## Burnout

```
                                                                      
,-,    ,-,     ,,     ,            
|  `-. |  `-. `  `-. ` `-.. ``-... 
```

When someone has hit burnout, progress is sporadic and slow if any
happens at all. Or in the extreme case they stop working altogether.
It goes without saying that this is terrible for area-under-the-curve.
As an employer, you never want employees to hit burnout no matter how
cynical you are; if they burn out, you are effectively paying for
someone at minimal efficiency. Sure, you could fire them, but now the
progress over time for this person is _0_, and in addition you have to
now spend other people's time hiring and training their replacement --
that's _negative_ area!

## Crunch time

The graphs above show that you _can_ indeed get more stuff done by
working more, but only _up to a point_. Beyond that point, you end up
with a _compounding negative return_. But therein also lies a clue:
crunch time is fine as long as there is a recovery period afterwards. By
giving time "in lieu" after a crunch, you can bring the baseline back up
and then progress as usual.

Now, when people take time off after a crunch, the area under their
curve (obviously) goes to zero, which hints at what I believe is a
fundamental property of crunch time work: it does not give you _more_
time over all, it merely borrows time from the future. That borrow also
comes with a marginal interest cost, but that may be a cost worth paying
occasionally if the deadline is important enough.

It should go without saying at this point, but "constant crunch time
mode" is clearly unsustainable -- the diminished progress rate will only
compound, and eventually you're spending lots of hours but getting very
little done. And making everyone miserable in the process! Giving time
in lieu is _essential_ for a company that wants to pull the "crunch
time" lever frequently.

# Exerting back-pressure

With the charts above, I hope I have demonstrated that it's actually in
the _company's_ interest that people don't overwork. However, a common
failure mode is that the insight that people are overworking is binary:
there is little signal that someone is overloaded until the one day where
it all boils over and they burn out. Perversely, this happens more in
companies where the employees feel particularly dedicated to the
company's work; employees absorb more work and tighter deadlines by
working harder because they care about what they're working towards. And
while they may occasionally mention there's a lot to do, it goes
unnoticed because, frankly, when isn't there a lot to do? But as a
result, they keep stretching themselves until they break.

The solution to this, which as we've seen is both in the employee's
_and_ employer's interest, is for people to be more willing to push back
and say no. This serves as a signal up the chain that work is being fed
into "the machine" faster than it can be acted upon with the expected
quality. There are a variety of ways that the leadership of the company
could act upon to that signal, including hiring (though beware the [mythical
man-month]; see also [work is work]), but that's beyond the scope of
this already-long article! The important thing is that the signal
_exists_ such that they can act upon it, which as we've demonstrated is
in their own self-interest.

# Performance expectations

Concerned (likely leadership-shaped) readers may see the advice above
and be worried that telling employees to push back and say no will lead
to a naysaying culture where ambition goes to die. Where
minute-counting, card-punching types leave no room for rising to a
challenge. And while that is a possible outcome, it also has a natural
counter-weight: the performance evaluation process.

Performance evaluations is, in my opinion, one of the linchpins of
company culture. It may seem cynical at first, but hear me out.
It's in performance evaluations that the company is forced to make
extremely explicit and public judgement calls on what it values and what
it does not. Behaviour that is rewarded is, naturally, reinforced,
sought, and promoted. And a bar quickly emerges that represents what the
company considers "good enough" performance, usually under a label like
"meets the bar" or "meets expectations".

Crucially, "good enough performance" should be tied to impact (which I
could write another whole article on how to define...) and progression,
not hours clocked. With the mental model we've established, the measure
of performance should be equal to the area under curve across a
quarter/year, perhaps with some weighting for particularly strategic
impact. Furthermore, I would argue, a rating of "meets expectations"
should be calibrated to what is reasonable to expect from a competent
employee with 40 hour work weeks _on average_ over the period. Under
such a definition, an average employee who sticks to normal working
hours should get a rating of meeting expectations. Which, to be clear,
is a _perfectly fine_ rating! And those who push back _too much_ are
likely to not meet that bar, to their own detriment.

Concerned (likely employee-shaped) readers may see the advice above
and contest that this will lead to a system where people are rewarded
for overworking. Such readers may also suggest that this is equivalent
to punishing people for _not_ overworking. And while there's _some_ truth
to the first part of that, as I've hopefully managed to illustrate
above, it's not as though you can just put in infinitely more hours and
end up infinitely more productive. Sure, you can put in a bit more time
and likely increase your output slightly, in which case you will likely
be rewarded for that, which seems fair to me. The crux is that there is no
_requirement_ or even expectation that you work more, such as if you
don't find that reward commensurate with the added stress or unhappiness
you experience from doing so. As stipulated above, working a 40 hour
work week (again, on average) should lead to a "meets expectations",
which is by definition "the expectation".

Of course there is a risk that the company's [Overton window] shifts and
the expectation moves to align with those who work more. And vigilance
is required on the company's part to fight that trend. However, as we've
shown, it's in the company's interest to do.

At this point it's important to acknowledge that companies differ in
their ambition. Some companies are looking to solve harder problems in
shorter time frames, which requires a higher sum-total area under the
curve. Some of that can be helped with more people, but given [Amdahl's
law] it's also necessary to get more out of each individual person. That
is, to expect a higher area under the curve for _each_ person. As we've
shown, adding time is not generally the way to do that sustainably over
longer periods of time. Instead, companies with such ambitions have to
require more progress per unit time -- that is, they require
higher-skilled employees.

This is where tensions arise, especially if a company's ambitions rise
over time. As the company requires more area under the curve, some are
able to deliver that while staying within sustainable working hours, but
others will struggle to do so. Unfortunately, when that happens, the
instinctive response tends to be to put in more hours to try to meet the
demand. For some people with a high tolerance for spending time on work,
that may work, but for the vast majority it will unravel in the medium-
to long-term. The answer isn't to work significantly more hours, as
we've shown. It is to increase progress-per-unit-time. In other words,
to "work smarter, not harder".

> An important aside here on choosing your employer: it is worth
> thinking about what kind of area-under-the-curve demands you _want_ to
> be subject to. Higher demands tend to correlate with better pay and
> larger impact, but that may not be worth the trade-off _to you_.
> Assuming your current progress-over-time is Y, you can choose to work
> for a company where the expected progress-over-time is <Y (you get to
> relax more), ~= Y (you work full days), or >Y (you need to stretch
> your skills and sometimes your time, but you get rewarded for it). The
> delta between your current Y and the expected progress-over-time can
> also be an opportunity to grow, though the _need_ to grow can also be
> stress-inducing and require you to invest more time into growing your
> skills (which can in turn feel like "more work" -- more on that
> below).

# Working smarter

On LinkedIn and in bookstores you can find endless guidance on how to
work smarter, and as this article is already getting long, I'm not going
to give any kind of comprehensive tutorial here. Instead, I want to
stress what I see as the primary directions in which you can "work
smarter".

The first is to get a given thing done faster. This usually entails
acquiring knowledge, tools, or experience. Domain knowledge gives you
access to algorithms, facts, and techniques that let you progress
faster. Tools (including learning your current tools better) reduce time
spent on menial, repetitive, and mechanical tasks. Experience allows you
to short-cut experimentation and trade-offs that you've explored before.
And each of these allow more net progress per unit time.

The second is to better choose the _order_ in which you do things such
that your time is spent where it matters most. My experience has been
that most engineers spend a disproportionate fraction of their time on
in the wrong place. Be that on a task that isn't the one that most needs
doing right now, that isn't the one blocking other people, or that isn't
the one that is the closest to completion. Working on "the wrong thing"
means you're spending precious time, but getting only small amounts of
area under the curve in return. Prioritization is a [complex
topic][eisenhower], but thinking consciously about where you spend your
time is a superpower that can yield large and rapid boosts to your
impact!

## Finding the time

While you will naturally get better at working smarter over the course
of your career, you'll improve at a much higher rate if you make doing
so a priority. Unfortunately, as with so many things in life, getting
better requires time, which is the dimension I've been arguing this
entire article you can't easily spend more of. However, there _is_ hope.

The decline we've seen in the earlier charts tend to be
context-specific. While it's hard to get more constructive _work_ out of
more hours, that doesn't mean that those hours can only be spend sitting
comatose on the couch to recover. You may not be able to get a lot more
value out of one more hour of work at the end of a day, but your ability
to do _other_ things like socialize or play is hopefully not as
compromised!

You may see where I'm going with this: if you can grow your skills in a
way that you enjoy and where it _doesn't_ feel like work, you _can_
invest more hours in a way that your area-under-the-curve will grow
sustainably over time!

There's no one way to make growing fun, and something you're happy to
spend time on -- it's a very individual thing. But it _is_ possible. You
can find growth in all sorts of extracurriculars that incidentally teach
you relevant skills; e.g., cooking can teach you prioritization, sports
can teach you teamwork, and teaching can boost you domain knowledge. For
some, growth comes in the form of finding a super interesting (but
likely less important) task at work, and then spending a bunch of spare
time on it _for fun_. While this is technically speaking "working more",
it doesn't feel that way. It could just as well not been a work-related
task; work just served as a useful pool from which to source things to
play with. And if it _also_ has a positive impact at work, that's just
an added bonus. Ultimately, the goal is just that you find ways to
_sustainably_ increase your area-under-the-curve; ways that are
conducive to your own happiness and joy.

> An aside on work-sourced play: if you see peers spending time on work
> things in their spare time, take a second to consider whether they're
> doing that because they feel like they _need to_, or if it's because
> they _want_ to. If they're doing it because they need to, that's
> symptomatic of dysfunctional company expectations (maybe due to lack
> of backpressure). But if they're doing it because they want to, let
> them have their fun and don't take that as a signal that you should
> _also_ be doing work in your spare time. Each to their own!

[Overton window]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overton_window
[mythical man-month]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mythical_Man-Month
[work is work]: https://codahale.com/work-is-work/
[Amdahl's law]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amdahl%27s_law
[eisenhower]: {% post_url 2023-10-29-eisenhower-vectors %}
