---
layout: post
title: "About 40 hours"
date: '2024-12-22T08:53:21Z'
# shared:
#   Bluesky: https://bsky.app/profile/jonhoo.bsky.social/post/3kzjpuj4tfn2f
#   Mastodon: https://fosstodon.org/@jonhoo/112949562704492004
#   Twitter/X: https://x.com/jonhoo/status/1823006316815638911
#   LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/posts/jonhoo_writing-about-people-to-people-activity-7228772004160536576-JjI3
---

I often hear, especially from folks working at younger companies and the
tech giants, that the 40 hour workweek is a lie. That "the company"
secretly (or not so secretly) always wants you to work more hours and
doesn't care if people are unhappy or burn out. That "they" will keep
piling on work with no regard for mental or physical well-being. And
while that is certainly true in some places, I think it is the
exception, not the norm. More often than not, I think reality is far
more nuanced.

Unfortunately, companies tend to fail to correct this impression
whenever they are asked about work/life balance, burnout, or workload
management. An all too common response is "we believe work/life balance
is something the company cannot dictate - it is a personal choice". With
a prior of "the company doesn't care", this comes across as (slightly
condescending) weasel-words that dodge the question.

The reality is that "what's the right number of hours to work in a week"
is not an easy question to answer. It varies not just from person to
person, but from week to week, and even day to day. And ignoring the
nuances involved does a disservice to both employees _and_ employers.
Cultivating the cultural norms and organizational policies needed to
strike a sustainable balance, while still treating employees like adults
with agency, is difficult [but worthwhile][worth]. Ultimately, I argue,
the right mixture of individual flexibility, internal back-pressure, and
well-adjusted expectations yields positive, healthy outcomes for
everyone involved; there's no need for good intentions (although it is
of course welcome!).

[worth]: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10713994/

> I've chosen not to get into the question of "what about the time I
> spend thinking about work stuff in the shower or on the toilet?" here.
> As you'll soon discover, this article is on the long side, so I had to
> declare the semi-philosophical discussion of what "work" even means
> out of scope!

# Area under the curve

So, let's explore some of that nuance. To do so, let's start with a
chart: incremental progress made per unit time, where "progress" is an
abstract value to measure the degree to which that time was spent
furthering something that's valuable to the company either directly
(actual work done) or indirectly (hiring, skill development, people
managing, etc.). Let's plot this over one week of five working days,
each with eight hours. My contention is that it would look something
like this:

<style type="text/css">
.blog-post img {
    height: 14em;
    max-width: 100%;
}
</style>

![A standard workweek. Days start out productive, growing slightly less
productive by the end. Later days in the week each start at a lower
initial output, leading to a small downwards trend across the
week.](/gfx/40-hours-standard.svg)

It's worth highlighting that the Y-axis here is _actual_ progress made
towards impactful outcomes. If you're tired or distracted, you may spend
the same number of hours ostensibly working, but you'll make more
mistakes, take longer to arrive at solutions, get more easily
distracted, and thus have a lower overall progress per unit time.

I've included what I think are some common patterns here. By the end of
the day, most people are less productive. By the end of Thursday, we
feel our energy levels and productivity drop. By Friday morning,
our productivity is diminished from the get-go, and drops severely as
the day progresses.

This is obviously a generalisation; the nature of the curve will depend
on a whole host of factors including general health condition, other
things going on in life, amount of time since last vacation, how
engaging the work is, or just whether the person stubbed their toe one
morning. It also probably applies more so to creative knowledge work
than to, say, chopping trees in the forest.

But don't take my word for it. Even if you ignore the various [trial
results from 4 Day Week Global][trial], there is a mounting body of
evidence showing correlation between number of hours worked and decline
in both [mental health][mental] (including [increased depression][dep])
and [physical health][physical], as well as [productivity overall][prod]
across a variety of industries. Interestingly, the detrimental effects
do not seem to stem solely from an increased workload, but also from
downstream effects like working "unsocial hours". It's also not clear
that 40 hours per week strikes the "right" balance in any meaningful
way.

[trial]: https://www.4dayweek.com/research
[mental]: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S027795361730031X
[dep]: https://www.jstor.org/stable/26567002
[physical]: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8504166/
[prod]: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2149325

What employers ultimately care about is the **area under this curve**.
That is, the sum-total progress made in a given time interval. So, armed
with this visualization, let's look at some common "get more work done"
patterns might look like in this model.

> Anecdotally, I also think the area under this curve correlates with
> our own happiness -- at least I know that I enjoy the feeling of
> getting things done that mattered,

## Longer days

![A workweek with longer days. Days start out productive, growing
markedly less productive by the end. Later days in the week each start
at an even lower initial output, leading to a moderate downwards trend
across the week.](/gfx/40-hours-longer.svg)

The exact shape of this curve will differ from person to person. For
some, an extra hour or two at work is no big deal and doing this
would _just_ increase their overall output. While for others their
ability to concentrate, be creative, and pay attention to detail drops
precipitously as the day stretches longer. Also, with longer days, you
have less time to fully recover by the next day, so the detrimental
effect cascades.

So, as an employer, would you prefer this curve to the one above? The
area under the curve is somewhat greater, but not by a huge margin.
You're also likely paying a cost in attrition due to unhappiness. That
cost in terms of hiring + retraining isn't captured here, but is
substantial. Furthermore, work at the lower ends of the Y-axis here is
more likely to have mistakes that must be corrected later, further
adding to the cost.

> A friend of mine who read an earlier draft of this article also made
> the excellent point that 2 hours at work often aren't equivalent to 2
> hours at home, especially for those with care duties. If you spend
> less time at home with your children, pets, loved ones, etc., that
> "saved" time can easily result in a much more severe backlash down the
> line. You might end up with kids who are harder to put to bed or
> relationships that need repair, which not only come with a mental
> toll, but also require a lot of _time_; the very resource you had
> hoped to save in the first place.

## Longer workweeks

Week 1

![A workweek with an extra day. Days start out productive, growing
progressively less productive by the end. Later days in the week each
start at a lower initial output, and by the sixth day the day end is not
very productive. This leads to a moderate downwards trend across the
week.](/gfx/40-hours-more-1.svg)

Week 2

![A workweek with an extra day after 1 week. Days start out productive, growing
progressively less productive by the end. Later days in the week each
start at a lower initial output, but even the first day starts lower
than usual. By the fifth day, the days are much less productive. This
leads to a marked downwards trend across the
week.](/gfx/40-hours-more-2.svg)

Week 3

![A workweek with an extra day after 2 weeks. Days start out relatively
productive, growing progressively less productive by the end. Later days
in the week each start at a lower initial output, but even the first day
starts quite low. By the third day, the days are much less productive.
This leads to a significant downwards trend across the
week.](/gfx/40-hours-more-3.svg)

At first, working more days seems attractive. Sure, the 6th day isn't
_super_ productive, but it still adds a lot of area! Once viewed over
time though, the detrimental effect becomes clearer -- seen across a
month, the area you added in the first few weeks is quickly eaten up by
the losses in later weeks.

> Interestingly, none of the studies I've looked at seem to distinguish
> between "more hours per day" and "more days per week".

## Burnout

![A standard workweek with burnout. Days are not particularly productive
across the board. Early in the week there are some small boosts of
output, but by week's end, very little gets done. Overall, the rate out
output is significantly below the earlier
graphs.](/gfx/40-hours-burnout.svg)

When someone has hit burnout, progress is sporadic and slow if any
happens at all. Or in the extreme case they stop working altogether.
It goes without saying that this is terrible for area-under-the-curve.
As an employer, you never want employees to hit burnout no matter how
cynical you are; if they burn out, you are effectively paying for
someone at minimal efficiency. Sure, you could fire them, but now the
progress over time for this person is _0_, and in addition you have to
now spend other people's time hiring and training their replacement --
that's _negative_ area!

## Crunch time

The graphs above show that you _can_ indeed get more stuff done by
working more, but only _up to a point_. Beyond that point, you end up
with a _compounding negative return_. But therein also lies a clue:
crunch time is fine as long as there is a recovery period afterwards. By
giving time "in lieu" after a crunch, you can bring the baseline back up
and then progress as usual.

Now, when people take time off after a crunch, the area under their
curve (obviously) goes to zero, which hints at what I believe is a
fundamental property of crunch time work: it does not give you _more_
time over all, it merely borrows time from the future. That borrow also
comes with a marginal interest cost, but that may be a cost worth paying
occasionally if the deadline is important enough, or if you are
crunching with others and the high-bandwidth concurrent crunch yields an
outsized impact.

> At ambitious companies, increased work output may also come with
> significant (possibly uncapped) financial upsides. That _can_ increase
> the tolerance for increased work, at least for a period of time, and
> can be a worthwhile investment if made intentionally. However, even
> with high rewards, _most_ people will inevitably hit
> diminishing-and-eventually-negative returns at some point, and will
> feel the consequences if they push past it.

It should go without saying at this point, but "constant crunch time
mode" is clearly unsustainable -- the diminished progress rate will only
compound, and eventually you're spending lots of hours but getting very
little done. And making everyone miserable in the process! Giving time
in lieu is _essential_ for a company that wants to pull the "crunch
time" lever frequently.

# Exerting back-pressure

With the charts above, I hope I have demonstrated that it's actually in
the _company's_ interest that people don't overwork. However, a common
failure mode is that the insight that people are overworking is binary:
there is little signal that someone is overloaded until the one day where
it all boils over and they burn out. Perversely, this happens more in
companies where the employees feel particularly dedicated to the
company's work; employees absorb more work and tighter deadlines by
working harder because they care about what they're working towards. And
while they may occasionally mention there's a lot to do, it goes
unnoticed because, frankly, when isn't there a lot to do? But as a
result, they keep stretching themselves until they break.

The solution to this, which as we've seen is both in the employee's
_and_ employer's interest, is for people to be willing to push back as
the work burden grows. This serves as a signal up the chain that work is
being fed into "the machine" faster than it can be acted upon with the
expected quality. There are a variety of ways that the leadership of the
company could act upon to that signal, including hiring (though beware
the [mythical man-month]; see also [work is work]), but that's beyond
the scope of this already-long article! The important thing is that the
signal _exists_ such that they can act upon it, which as we've
demonstrated is in their own self-interest.

> I want to stress that back-pressure does *not* mean "just say no".
> Instead, effective back-pressure is all about negotiation. That is a
> topic for a blog post all on its own, but very briefly: when you're
> near capacity and someone approaches you with more work, you should
> present them with what work would need to be dropped in order to take
> on their work instead. It _could_ be that their piece of work is more
> important than what you're currently prioritising, but if so, that
> other piece of work should be dropped! If both are important,
> something else has to go. That's what "at capacity" means. The choice
> of what gets dropped may be difficult, and may need to propagate back
> up the leadership chain, but *that's the back-pressure working as
> intended*.

# Performance expectations

Concerned (likely leadership-shaped) readers may see the advice above
and be worried that telling employees to push back will lead to a
naysaying culture where ambition goes to die. Where minute-counting,
card-punching types leave no room for rising to a challenge. And while
that is a possible outcome, it also has a natural counter-weight: the
performance evaluation process.

Performance evaluations is, in my opinion, one of the linchpins of
company culture. It may seem cynical at first, but hear me out. It's in
performance evaluations that the company is forced to make extremely
explicit and public judgement calls on what it values and what it does
not. Behaviour that is rewarded is, naturally, reinforced, sought, and
promoted. And a bar quickly emerges that represents what the company
considers "good enough" performance, usually under a label like "meets
the bar" or "meets expectations".

Crucially, "good enough performance" should be tied to impact (which I
could write another whole article on how to define...) and progression,
not hours clocked. With the mental model we've established, the measure
of performance should be equal to the area under curve across a
quarter/year, perhaps with some weighting for particularly strategic
impact. Furthermore, I would argue, a rating of "meets expectations"
should be calibrated to what is reasonable to expect from a competent
employee with 40 hour work weeks _on average_ over the period. Under
such a definition, an average employee who sticks to normal working
hours should get a rating of meeting expectations. Which, to be clear,
is a _perfectly fine_ rating! And those who push back _too much_ are
likely to not meet that bar, to their own detriment.

Concerned (likely employee-shaped) readers may see the advice above
and contest that this will lead to a system where people are rewarded
for overworking. Such readers may also suggest that this is equivalent
to punishing people for _not_ overworking. There's some truth to the
first part of that, though only up to a limit; as I've hopefully managed
to illustrate above, it's not as though you can just put in infinitely
more hours and end up infinitely more productive. You _can_ increase
your output slightly if you tolerate more work, in which case you will
likely be rewarded for that, but that just seems... fair? That is, as
long as the baseline is set such that it's possible to meet when working
40 hour work weeks (again, on average). For the latter though, if you
don't find the reward above that bar commensurate with the added stress
or unhappiness you would experience from doing so work week (again, on
average), that's a perfectly fine choice. Getting a "meets expectations"
and the pay check commensurate with that (which should be fair wage of
course!) isn't a punishment, it's just kind of how jobs work.

Of course there is a risk that the company's [Overton window] shifts and
the expectation moves to align with those who work more. And vigilance
is required on the company's part to fight that trend. However, as we've
shown, it's in the company's interest to do.

At this point it's important to acknowledge that companies differ in
their ambition. Some companies are looking to solve harder problems in
shorter time frames, which requires a higher sum-total area under the
curve. Some of that can be helped with more people, but given [Amdahl's
law] it's also necessary to get more out of each individual person. That
is, to expect a higher area under the curve for _each_ person. As we've
shown, adding time is not generally the way to do that sustainably over
longer periods of time. Instead, companies with such ambitions have to
require more progress per unit time -- that is, they require
higher-output employees.

This is where tensions arise, especially if a company's ambitions rise
over time. As the company requires more area under the curve, some are
able to deliver that while staying within sustainable working hours, but
others will struggle to do so. Unfortunately, when that happens, the
instinctive response tends to be to put in more hours to try to meet the
demand. For some people with a high tolerance for spending time on work,
that may work, but for the vast majority it will unravel in the medium-
to long-term. The answer isn't to work significantly more hours, as
we've shown. It is to increase progress-per-unit-time. In other words,
to "work smarter, not harder".

> An important aside here on choosing your employer: it is worth
> thinking about what kind of area-under-the-curve demands you _want_ to
> be subject to. Higher demands tend to correlate with better pay and
> larger impact, but that may not be worth the trade-off _to you_.
> Assuming your current progress-over-time is Y, you can choose to work
> for a company where the expected progress-over-time is <Y (you get to
> relax more), ~= Y (you work full days), or >Y (you need to stretch
> your skills and sometimes your time, but you get rewarded for it). The
> delta between your current Y and the expected progress-over-time can
> also be an opportunity to grow, though the _need_ to grow can also be
> stress-inducing and require you to invest more time into growing your
> skills (which can in turn feel like "more work" -- more on that
> below).
>
> In the end, you need to factor in your own stress tolerance, your
> desire to grow, and your life situation, and pick accordingly. And
> yes, be willing to re-visit that decision over time; early in your
> career may have been the right time to work at a super-ambitious,
> high-octane company to give your career and skills a boost, but that
> doesn't _necessarily_ mean it's the right place three kids later
> (although hats off to you if it is!).

# Working smarter

On LinkedIn and in bookstores you can find endless guidance on how to
work smarter, and as this article is already long, I'm not going to give
any kind of comprehensive tutorial here. Instead, I want to stress what
I see as the primary directions in which you can "work smarter".

The first is to get a given thing done faster. This usually entails
acquiring knowledge, tools, or experience. Domain knowledge gives you
access to algorithms, facts, and techniques that let you progress
faster. Tools (including learning your current tools better) reduce time
spent on menial, repetitive, and mechanical tasks. Experience allows you
to short-cut experimentation and trade-offs that you've explored before.
And each of these allow more net progress per unit time.

The second is to better choose the _order_ in which you do things such
that your time is spent where it matters most. My experience has been
that most engineers spend a disproportionate fraction of their time on
in the wrong place. Be that on a task that isn't the one that most needs
doing right now, that isn't the one blocking other people, or that isn't
the one that is the closest to completion. Working on "the wrong thing"
means you're spending precious time, but getting only small amounts of
area under the curve in return. Prioritization is a [complex
topic][eisenhower], but thinking consciously about where you spend your
time is a superpower that can yield large and rapid boosts to your
impact!

The third is to be more cognisant of _what_ you work on. It makes a huge
difference to your energy levels, focus, and consequently output if
you're working on something that engages you, that you care about, or
that you take pride in. And it significantly reduces, although does not
eliminate, the risk of burning out from it. While you can rarely choose
completely freely what you work on in the context of most jobs, utilize
the agency that you _do_ have, including switching teams if necessary,
such that the work aligns with what makes you tick.

And the fourth is to be strategic about _when_ you work. If your job
mandates 9-5, this may be difficult, but most creative jobs are more
flexible than that — utilize that flexibility. If you're more productive
in the evenings, move some of your workday there. If you feel yourself
procrastinating excessively one day, take an hour to do something else
and make up that hour some other time. And conversely, if you worked
late last night to push that thing over the finish line, recoup that
time today; it was probably a worthwhile trade! Aligning your work with
your own productivity cycle can give significant improvements to your
own output even if you don't work _any_ more hours total.

> As a wise mentor of mine has pointed out repeatedly to me, working
> smarter helps, but the real superpower is _resting_ smarter. If
> outside of work you're constantly checking your work Slack or email,
> or thinking about "this document" or "that demo", then the path to
> burnout is short. You're effectively burning the candle on both ends;
> working both while at work and at home. Having a clear delineation of
> when work time ends and not-work time starts can help tremendously.
> The same can be said for making good and varied use of that rest time
> -- meet friends, exercise, go on a date night, explore the
> neighborhood, learn a new skill, cuddle on the couch -- whatever
> floats your boat. The important thing is that you feel like that time
> is replenishing the same batteries you exhaust at work.

## Finding the time

While you will naturally get better at working smarter over the course
of your career, you'll improve at a much higher rate if you make doing
so a priority. Unfortunately, as with so many things in life, getting
better requires time, which is the dimension I've been arguing this
entire article you can't easily spend more of. However, there _is_ hope.

The decline we've seen in the earlier charts tend to be
context-specific. While it's hard to get more constructive _work_ out of
more hours, that doesn't mean that those hours can only be spend sitting
comatose on the couch to recover. You may not be able to get a lot more
value out of one more hour of work at the end of a day, but your ability
to do _other_ things like socialize or play is hopefully not as
compromised!

You may see where I'm going with this: if you can grow your skills in a
way that you enjoy and where it _doesn't_ feel like work, you _can_
invest more hours in a way that your area-under-the-curve will grow
sustainably over time!

There's no one way to make growing fun, and something you're happy to
spend time on -- it's a very individual thing. But it _is_ possible. You
can find growth in all sorts of extracurriculars that incidentally teach
you relevant skills; e.g., cooking can teach you prioritization, sports
can teach you teamwork, and teaching can boost your domain knowledge.
For some, growth comes in the form of finding a super interesting (but
likely less important) task at work, and then spending a bunch of spare
time on it _for fun_. While this is technically speaking "working more",
it doesn't feel that way. It could just as well not been a work-related
task; work just served as a useful pool from which to source things to
play with. And if it _also_ has a positive impact at work, that's just
an added bonus. Ultimately, the goal is just that you find ways to
_sustainably_ increase your area-under-the-curve; ways that are
conducive to your own happiness and joy.

> An aside on work-sourced play: if you see peers spending time on work
> things in their spare time, take a second to consider whether they're
> doing that because they feel like they _need to_, or if it's because
> they _want_ to. If they're doing it because they need to, that's
> symptomatic of dysfunctional company expectations (maybe due to lack
> of back-pressure). But if they're doing it because they want to, let
> them have their fun and don't take that as a signal that you should
> _also_ be doing work in your spare time. Each to their own!

[Overton window]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overton_window
[mythical man-month]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mythical_Man-Month
[work is work]: https://codahale.com/work-is-work/
[Amdahl's law]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amdahl%27s_law
[eisenhower]: {% post_url 2023-10-29-eisenhower-vectors %}
